Haystack Search Result Ordering and Pre-Rendering Results
#########################################################
:date: 2010-08-10 03:41
:author: Steve Schwarz
:category: webdev
:tags: django, haystack, search, whoosh
:slug: haystack-search-result-ordering-and-pre-rende

I use `Haystack`_ and the Python `Whoosh`_ project to provide search
over ~3400 articles in my `Googility.com`_ database. I had originally
implemented the search in the "simplest way that works". I was making
some other enhancement to Googility and noticed the search result page
had two undesirable  behaviors:

#. The ordering of results was basically random for all matching
   articles. For the domain of magazine article search having a bias
   toward the most recent publications would be more desirable.
#. Looking at the django-debug-toolbar output each element in the search
   results was hitting the database twice (once for the Article instance
   and again for its corresponding Periodical). So a single result page
   was making as many as 60 database selects.

Haystack provides mechanisms to help with both of these issues.

Imposing an Order on the SearchQuerySet

Haystack models search using an API based on Django's QuerySet. The
only thing to remember is it performs its queries over the Haystack
SearchIndex subclass(es) you create instead of over the Django ORM. So
you define a SearchIndex subclass that contains the data from the
application's model overwhich you'd like to search. You can also define
additional fields that can be used to modify the results of the query.
Here is my magazine Article search index:

.. code:: python

  from haystack.sites import site
  from haystack import indexes
  from periodicals.models import Article

  class ArticleIndex(indexes.SearchIndex):
      text = indexes.CharField(document=True, use_template=True)
      pub_date = indexes.DateTimeField(model_attr='issue__pub_date')

  site.register(Article, ArticleIndex)``

The text field contains the "document" over which the search engine
(Whoosh) will actually perform the search. I'm using the template
feature that allows me to use Django templates to format the data
presented to the search engine.

I added the pub\_date field to the index to allow the matching search
results to be ordered by the pub\_date field. The 'issue\_\_pub\_date'
syntax mirrors the Django QuerySet syntax and means extract the
"pub\_date" attribute of the Article's "issue" attribute (it joins
Article to Publication and get's the Publication's published date).

Then the urls.py is modified to change the SearchQuerySet passed to
the default haystacksearch view to order by the ArticleIndex's pub\_date
attribute:

.. code:: python

  from haystack.views import SearchView
  from haystack.query import SearchQuerySet

  # query results with most recent publication date first
  sqs = SearchQuerySet().order_by('-pub_date')
  urlpatterns = patterns('',
                         url(r'^search/',
                             SearchView(
                                 load_all=False,
                                 searchqueryset=sqs,
                                 ),
                             name='haystack_search',
                             ),<snip>``

Pre-Rendering Result HTML

Since I have only a few thousand records I decided to follow the
`Haystack Best Practices for Not Hitting the Database`_. This solution
trades space in the Whoosh index files by generating the HTML that will
be displayed when each article matches along with the data used by
Whoosh to match articles to search keywords. The changes were pretty
simple. In the ArticleIndex:

.. code:: python

  from haystack.sites import site
  from haystack import indexes
  from periodicals.models import Article

  class ArticleIndex(indexes.SearchIndex):
      text = indexes.CharField(document=True, use_template=True)
      pub_date = indexes.DateTimeField(model_attr='issue__pub_date')
      # pregenerate the search result HTML for an Article
      # this avoids any database hits when results are processed
      # at the cost of storing all the data in the Haystack index
      result_text = indexes.CharField(indexed=False, use_template=True)site.register(Article, ArticleIndex)``

The use\_template keyword requires you to create a Django template file
that is used during index creation to build the HTML that will be
displayed. The only peculiarity I found was figuring out where the
template should live. On my system it was at
templates/search/indexes/periodicals/article\_result\_text.txt. I
understand the periodicals/article\_result\_text part but I haven't
looked into where the search/indexes is generated from. I imagine a
reverse() to find the url for the view and "indexes" is appended to
that...

The final change is the template used to display the search results.
In order to not hit the database the object list generated by the
haystack SearchView is placed into the context used by the template and
only the result\_text attribute should be accessed:

.. code:: xml

  {% if page.object_list %}
  <div class="search-results-title">Results <b>{{page.start_index}}</b>  - <b>{{page.end_index}}</b> for <b>{{query}}</b></div>    
  <div class="search-results-list">    
  {% for result in page.object_list %}      
    {{result.result_text|safe}}    
  {% endfor %}    
  <div class="pagination">
      <span class="step-links">
        {% if page.has_previous %}
            previous
        {% endif %}
        <span class="current">
            Page {{ page.number }} of {{ page.paginator.num_pages }}
        </span>
        {% if page.has_next %}
            next
        {% endif %}
      </span>
    </div></div>{% else %}<h2>No matching articles found.</h2>
  {% endif %}

The actual result is placed in the template via
{{result.result\_text\|safe}} the safe filter is required since the HTML
doesn't need to be escaped again - it was escaped by Django when it was
placed into the SearchIndex.

So now my search results are in reverse chronological order and they
render using only 3 database queries and at least 10x faster than
before.

.. _Haystack: http://haystacksearch.org/
.. _Whoosh: http://whoosh.ca/
.. _Googility.com: http://googility.com
.. _Haystack Best Practices for Not Hitting the Database: http://docs.haystacksearch.org/dev/best_practices.html#avoid-hitting-the-database
